VSPACE
------
A quick way to generate a parameter space for ``VPLANET``.

Installation
============
Navigate to the vspace directory and run ``python setup.py``. All this does is put some 
path info in your shell files.

Examples
========
Run vspace on the command line by typing:

    vspace <input file>

An input file is necessary. Take a look at the ``input`` file in the examples directory. 
This file will contain a list of files to be copied (from some source directory to a 
destination directory) and all the VPLANET options you wish to change or add to each file. 

You will need to provide a directory that contains template/example input files (such as 
any directory in vplanet/examples) in the following syntax:
  
    srcfolder <path of directory>
    
Additionally, you will need to provide the path of a destination directory. This is where
your suite of initial conditions will live:
  
    destfolder <path of directory>
    
Then, provide a list of the files you wish to be copied and used by VPLANET, and all 
options you wish to change, in the following format:
    
    file <name of file in srcfolder>
    <option name> <value>
    <option name> <value>
    ...
    
    file <another file in srcfolder>
    <option name> <value>
    ...
    
Notice that each file is given a separate line starting with ``file``. All options below
that up to the next instance of ``file`` will belong to the previous entry. 

Finally, it is advisable to provide a prefix for the generated directories: 

    trialname <some descriptive name for your simulations>
    
This defaults to ``default``. As an example, if you generate 3 trials, with the default 
trialname, these will be number like so:
    
    default0/
    default1/
    default2/

You can additionally remove options from a source file by the following syntax:
  
    rm <option name>
    
For the time being, this merely comments out the matching line.
    
How to generate a parameter space
=================================
To generate trials that explore a parameter space, simply provide a range of values for 
the desired option instead of a single value. These should have 3 entries, surrounded by
square brackets ``[]``, in the following manner:
  
    <option name> [start, end, spacing] <prefix>
    
(Here, ``prefix`` is a string that will be used in the naming of the output directories. 
More on this below.) For example, to generate trials changing ``dSemi`` from 1 to 2 with 
spacings of 0.1:
  
    dSemi  [1, 2, 0.1]  a
    
Alternatively, you can provide the number of trials instead of the spacing by putting an
``n`` before the 3rd numerical entry. For example,

    dSemi  [1, 2, n10]  a
    
would generate ten trials, equally spaced, from 1 to 2. You can also changed to 
logarithmic spacing by using ``l`` instead of ``n``:
  
    dSemi  [1, 2, l10]  a
    
would generate ten trials, logarithmically spaced, from 1 to 2. 

Minus options are allowed, but if you are providing the spacing, rather than using the 
``n`` or ``l`` option, either provide a negative spacing or swap the start and end values.
Use:

    dRadius  [-1, -2, -0.1]  R

or,

    dRadius  [-2, -1, 0.1]  R
    
rather than ``dRadius [-1, -2, 0.1]  R``. VSPACE will not check whether a minus option is 
allowed by VPLANET, so make sure you check ``vplanet -h``. 

You can vary more than one parameter at a time! For example, in your input file you might 
have,

    dSemi  [1, 2, n10]  a
    dEcc   [0.1, 0.2, n10]  e
    
would generate initial conditions for every possible combination of ``dSemi`` and 
``dEcc``, resulting in a total of 100 trials. You can do this for as many parameters as 
you like, so you have the power to generate a large number of files very quickly. Use this
wisely: test with small numbers first to ensure that files end up in the correct locations
and that initial conditions are indeed output with the desired values.  
